>> Brangham: ON THIS EDITION FOR
SATURDAY, NOVEMBER 29: FORMER
EGYPTIAN PRESIDENT HOSNI MUBARAK
HAS MURDER CHARGES AGAINST HIM
DROPPED-- WHAT THE RULING MEANS
FOR EGYPT AND THE MIDDLE EAST.
ALSO, THE LATEST ON THE FIGHT
AGAINST ISIS IN IRAQ.
AND IN OUR SIGNATURE SEGMENT,
HOW THE BATTLE OVER TEACHER
TENURE IN CALIFORNIA IS LEADING
TO ACTION IN ANOTHER STATE.
NEXT ON PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
FROM THE TISCH WNET STUDIOS IN
LINCOLN CENTER IN NEW YORK,
WILLIAM BRANGHAM.
>> Brangham: GOOD EVENING.
THANKS FOR JOINING US.
I’M WILLIAM BRANGHAM IN FOR HARI
SREENIVASAN.
WE BEGIN WITH A MAJOR LEGAL
VICTORY FOR OUSTED EGYPTIAN
PRESIDENT HOSNI MUBARAK.
AN EGYPTIAN COURT TODAY
DISMISSED CHARGES THAT MUBARAK
WAS RESPONSIBLE FOR KILLING
HUNDREDS OF DEMONSTRATORS DURING
THE ARAB SPRING UPRISING IN
2011.
THE 86-YEAR-OLD APPEARED IN
COURT ON A STRETCHER.
THE COURTROOM ERUPTED IN CHEERS
WHEN THE VERDICT WAS READ.
MUBARAK AND HIS TWO SONS WERE
ALSO ACQUITTED OF CORRUPTION
CHARGES.
THE VERDICT MEANS MUBARAK COULD
GO FREE FOR THE FIRST TIME SINCE
HE WAS REMOVED FROM OFFICE THREE
YEARS AGO.
HE’S ALSO APPROACHING THE END OF
HIS SENTENCE IN A SEPARATE
CORRUPTION CASE.
THE JUDGE SAID THE DECISION HAD
"NOTHING TO DO WITH POLITICS."
FAMILY MEMBERS OF THE PROTESTERS
WHO WERE KILLED EXPRESSED ANGER
AT THE RULING.
ONE CRITIC SAID THE COURTS HAVE
NOW ACQUITTED THE OFFICERS WHO
KILLED THE DEMONSTRATORS AND THE
MAN THEY SAY GAVE THE ORDERS.
FOR MORE ON TODAY’S RULING, WE
TURN TO SAMER SHEHATA.
HE IS AN ASSOCIATE PROFESSOR OF
MIDDLE EASTERN POLITICS AT THE
UNIVERSITY OF OKLAHOMA.
HE JOINS US NOW FROM NORMAN,
OKLAHOMA.
PROFESSOR, HOW IMPORTANT IS THIS
RULING FOR EGYPT?
>> IT HAS VERY LITTLE POLITICAL
SIGNIFICANCE FOR EGYPT’S FUTURE
POLITICAL DEVELOPMENT.
IT’S UNLIKELY THAT THIS IS GOING
TO AFFECT THE COURSE OF EVENTS
IN TERMS OF GOVERNMENT POLICY OR
EVEN IN TERMS OF OPPOSITION
PROTEST.
MUBARAK IS, IN MANY WAYS,
YESTERDAY’S NEWS.
IT’S IMPORTANT IN OTHER WAYS,
BUT NOT FOR EGYPT’S POLITICAL
FUTURE.
>> Brangham: AND ARE THERE
LARGER IMPLICATIONS, IF NOT IN
EGYPT, THEN FOR THE REST OF THE
MIDDLE EAST?
>> WELL, I THINK MUBARAK’S
ACQUITTAL TODAY IS, OF COURSE,
SYMBOLICALLY VERY IMPORTANT.
I MEAN, MUBARAK WAS EGYPT’S
PRESIDENT, REALLY AN
AUTHORITARIAN PRESIDENT FOR 29
AND A HALF YEARS.
IT’S ALSO THE CASE, I THINK,
THAT OVER 860 PEOPLE, 6,000
PEOPLE WERE INJURED DURING THE
18 DAYS OF THE UPRISING.
SO TO NOT TRY MR. MUBARAK IN A
FAIR WAY AND HOLD HIM
ACCOUNTABLE, AT LEAST COMPLICIT
FOR SOME OF THOSE DEATHS NOT TO
MENTION THOSE IN THE MINISTRY OF
THE INTERIOR, IS REALLY A
TRAVESTY OF JUSTICE.
SO SYMBOLICALLY, OF COURSE, IT’S
AN ABSURD OUTCOME.
AND I THINK IT IS QUITE TELLING
IN TERMS OF WHERE EGYPT IS RIGHT
NOW IN COMPARISON TO THE GOALS
OF THE 2011 REVOLUTION OR
UPRISING.
MR. MUBARAK IS FOUND NOT GUILTY.
HE IS LIKELY TO BECOME A FREE
PERSON IN A FEW MONTHS, WHEREAS
THERE ARE THOUSANDS OF POLITICAL
PRISONERS IN EGYPT TODAY,
INCLUDING MANY OF THE
REVOLUTIONARIES, THE YOUTH WHO
INITIATED THE JANUARY 25
UPRISING.
>> Brangham: SO FOR THE
AVERAGE EGYPTIAN WHO MAY HAVE
SEEN MUBARAK’S OVERTHROW AS
HUGELY IMPORTANT FOR THE ARAB
SPRING, WHAT DOES IT MEAN, THAT
HE MIGHT SOON BE A FREE MAN?
>> WELL, I THINK IT TELLS US
LARGELY ABOUT THE FATE OF THE
ARAB SPRING-- QUOTE, UNQUOTE--
NEARLY FOUR YEARS AFTER IT BEGAN
IN A SMALL TOWN IN THE INTERIOR
OF TUNISIA IN DECEMBER OF 2010.
MANY OF THE HOPES AND
ASPIRATIONS THAT MANY OF US HAD
FOR THE ARAB WORLD, A
RENAISSANCE, POLITICAL
DEMOCRACY, HUMAN RIGHTS, RULE OF
LAW, A NEW ERA OF PARTICIPATION
AND SO ON, THAT LARGELY THAT HAS
NOT BEEN FULFILLED WITH THE
PARTIAL EXCEPTION, QUITE A
HOPEFUL EXCEPTION, OF TUNISIA.
BUT IF WE LOOK AT EGYPT, IF WE
LOOK AT LIBYA, IF WE LOOK AT
SYRIA, CERTAINLY, IF WE LOOK AT
BAHRAIN, VERY LITTLE PROGRESS
HAS BEEN MADE.
AND AUTHORITARIAN REGIMES-- IN
SOME CASES VERY BLOODY AND
BRUTAL AUTHORITARIAN REGIMES--
WERE REALLY THE ABSENCE OF THE
RULE OF LAW, AND CHAOS ARE THE
ORDER OF THE DAY.
>> Brangham: OKAY, PROFESSOR
SAMER SHEHATA, THANK YOU VERY
MUCH FOR JOINING US.
>> YOU’RE WELCOME.
>> Brangham: IN SYRIA, ISIS
REPORTEDLY ORCHESTRATED FOUR
SUICIDE BOMBINGS WITHIN JUST A
MATTER OF HOURS TODAY IN THE
TOWN OF KOBANI.
ONE OF THE BOMBS WAS DETONATED
AT A BORDER CROSSING BETWEEN
TURKEY AND SYRIA.
IT’S THE FIRST TIME AN ISIS
ATTACK HAS ORIGINATED FROM
WITHIN TURKEY.
TURKISH LEADERS HAVE DENIED
SUPPORTING THE JIHADISTS.
KURDISH MILITIA HAVE BEEN
BATTLING ISIS FIGHTERS ON THE
SYRIAN SIDE OF THE BORDER FOR
THE PAST TWO MONTHS, WITH THE
HELP OF U.S.-LED AIR STRIKES.
AN INTERNATIONAL MONITORING
GROUP SAYS AT LEAST 30 KURDISH
FIGHTERS HAVE DIED IN THE RECENT
BATTLES.
WE’LL HAVE MORE ON WHAT’S AT
STAKE IN THE FIGHTING LATER IN
THE PROGRAM.
AND THE DEATH TOLL FROM FRIDAY’S
ATTACK ON A MOSQUE IN THE
NIGERIAN CITY OF KANO IS NOW
OVER 120.
MORE THAN 200 WERE REPORTEDLY
INJURED.
NO ONE HAS YET TAKEN
RESPONSIBILITY FOR ATTACKING THE
BUILDING WITH BOTH BOMBS AND
GUNFIRE.
OFFICIALS SAY THE OPERATION BORE
THE HALLMARKS OF THE ISLAMIC
REBEL GROUP BOKO HARAM.
THE SUNNI JIHADISTS HAVE BEEN
TARGETING TRADITIONAL ISLAMIC
RELIGIOUS AUTHORITIES FOR NEARLY
SIX YEARS NOW.
THE EMIR OF KANO HAS BEEN A
VOCAL CRITIC OF THE GROUP.
HE WAS NOT AT THE MOSQUE DURING
THE ATTACK.
HERE IN THE U.S., MISSOURI
GOVERNOR JAY NIXON IS CALLING
FOR A SPECIAL SESSION OF THE
STATE LEGISLATURE TO APPROVE
ADDITIONAL FUNDING FOR THE
NATIONAL GUARD AND HIGHWAY
PATROL, WHO ARE PROVIDING
SECURITY IN AND AROUND FERGUSON.
TODAY, ACTIVISTS ARE STAGING A
120-MILE MARCH TO THE STATE
CAPITAL IN JEFFERSON CITY TO
PROTEST THE KILLING OF UNARMED
TEEN MICHAEL BROWN.
YESTERDAY, PROTESTERS FORCED A
MALL NEAR FERGUSON TO
TEMPORARILY SHUT DOWN BY LYING
ON THE FLOOR FOR A MOMENT OF
SILENCE.
THE U.N. COMMITTEE AGAINST
TORTURE HAS ISSUED A NEW REPORT
SAYING U.S. LAW ENFORCEMENT
DOESN’T FULLY COMPLY WITH AN
INTERNATIONAL TREATY BANNING
TORTURE AND CRUEL TREATMENT.
THE PANEL RAISED CONCERNS OVER
POLICE SHOOTINGS OF UNARMED
AFRICAN-AMERICANS AS WELL AS
OTHER ISSUES, INCLUDING THE
FAILURE TO FULLY INVESTIGATE
ALLEGATIONS OF TORTURE OF
PRISONERS HELD ABROAD, AND THE
USE OF SOLITARY CONFINEMENT IN
U.S. PRISONS.
AND IN HEALTH NEWS, NEW RESEARCH
SHOWS AN INGREDIENT IN
ANTIBACTERIAL SOAP, TOOTHPASTE,
SHAMPOO AND OTHER HOUSEHOLD
PRODUCTS MIGHT LEAD TO CANCER IN
MICE.
THE STUDY RECENTLY PUBLISHED BY
SCIENTISTS AT THE UNIVERSITY OF
CALIFORNIA-DAVIS, FOUND THAT
EXPOSING MICE TO HIGH LEVELS OF
TRICLOSAN MADE THEM MORE
SUSCEPTIBLE TO LIVER TUMORS.
RESEARCHERS SAY THE MICE IN THE
STUDY WERE EXPOSED TO MUCH
HIGHER CONCENTRATIONS OF THE
MICROBIAL INGREDIENT THAN A
TYPICAL PERSON WOULD ENCOUNTER.
HOWEVER, THEY SAY PROLONGED
EXPOSURE COULD BE A RISK AND
MORE RESEARCH IS NEEDED TO
DETERMINE THE ACTUAL RISK TO
HUMANS.
>> Brangham: RETURNING NOW TO
THE THREAT OF ISIS IN IRAQ AND
SYRIA.
JUST A FEW MONTHS AGO, SOME U.S.
OFFICIALS WORRIED THAT ISIS
FIGHTERS COULD ACTUALLY OVERTAKE
BAGHDAD, BUT THERE ARE NEW SIGNS
OF CONFIDENCE IN THE FIGHT
AGAINST THE ISLAMIC JIHADISTS IN
IRAQ.
FOR MORE, WE ARE JOINED FROM
GRAND RAPIDS, MICHIGAN, BY
DOUGLAS OLLIVANT, A PARTNER WITH
MANTID INTERNATIONAL.
DOUG, WELCOME BACK.
I UNDERSTAND YOU SPENT A GOOD
DEAL OF TIME IN BAGHDAD.
WHAT IS IT LIKE IN BAGHDAD
TODAY?
>> THE ATMOSPHERE IN BAGHDAD WAS
VERY POSITIVE, BOTH AMONG THE
IRAQIS AND WITH MANY OF THE U.S.
FORCES AT OUR EMBASSY.
I THINK WHAT MOST STRUCK ME IN
BAGHDAD WAS THE SENSE OF
NORMALITY OF LIFE.
PEOPLE ARE GOING ABOUT THEIR
BUSINESS.
THEY’RE SHOPPING.
THERE ARE TRAFFIC JAMS BECAUSE
EVERYONE IS OUT SHOPPING AND
GOING TO WORK AND GOING TO
WHERE THEY NEED TO GO.
WHEN YOU GO TO BAGHDAD AIRPORT,
THE SECURITY IS TIGHT, BUT YOU
GET THERE, AND THERE ARE LINES.
THERE ARE PEOPLE FLYING ALL OVER
THE WORLD TO AND FROM BAGHDAD.
JUST HOW MUCH LIFE IS GOING ON,
EVEN THOUGH THE FRONT IN SOME
PLACES IS NOT TOO FAR AWAY.
>> Brangham: PRESIDENT OBAMA
RECENTLY APPROVED THE SENDING OF
ANOTHER 1,500 TROOPS, WHICH IS
BASIC A DOUBLING OF THE U.S.
FORCE THERE.
HOW MUCH OF THE RECENT CHANGES
THAT YOU WITNESSED WOULD YOU
CREDIT TO U.S. FORCES’
INVOLVEMENT THERE?
>> I THINK EXTERNAL FORCES, BOTH
THE UNITED STATES AND-- WE
HAVE TO BE CANDID-- IRAN’S
INTERVENTION HAVE GREATLY
ASSISTED THE IRAQIS IN PUSHING
BACK THE ISLAMIC STATE.
WITH COACHING FROM THESE OUTSIDE
POWERS AND, OF COURSE, WITH
U.S. AIR POWER IN SUPPORT,
BOTH THE IRAQI ARMY AND THE
KURDISH PESHMERGA, BOTH OF
WHICH DID NOT LOOK VERY
GOOD-- LET’S FACE IT-- IN THE
INITIAL PUSH OF THE ISLAMIC
STATE INTO IRAQ, HAVE MADE SOME
FAIRLY SERIOUS GAINS OVER THE
LAST COUPLE OF WEEKS.
IN SALAH AL-DIN AND DYALA, THE
IRAQI ARMY HAS PUSHED FORWARD.
THEY BROKE THE SIEGE AT BEIJI
REFINERY, AND IN THE NORTH THE
KURDS HAVE BEEN ABLE TO PUSH
A LITTLE FURTHER IN TOWARDS
MOSUL.
>> Brangham: I’M CURIOUS ABOUT
THE IRAQI ARMY BECAUSE, YOU
KNOW, WE SPENT YEARS AND
BILLIONS OF DOLLARS TRYING TO
CREATE A RELIABLE FORCE, AND
WHEN ISIS FIRST SHOWED UP, MUCH
OF THAT FORCE WAS DEFEATED OR
VANISHED INTO THIN AIR.
BUT YOU SEEM TO FEEL THAT THEY
ARE DOING A BETTER JOB NOW AND
ARE ABLE TO STAND UP A LITTLE
MORE EFFECTIVELY.
>> WELL, I THINK SOME MORE
RELIABLE TROOPS HAVE BEEN
BROUGHT FROM THE SOUTH, TROOPS
THAT ARE VERY DEVOTED TO THE
IRAQI STATE.
BUT PART OF THIS, I THINK, IS
THE ARMY THAT WE BUILT FOR THE
IRAQI ARMY.
THIS WAS AN ARMY THAT WAS BUILT
TO BE A POLICE GARRISON FORCE.
AND THAT’S WHAT WE BUILT IT FOR.
AND THEN WHEN IT FACED THIS
ISLAMIC STATE ARMY THAT CAME IN
AND PUSHED THROUGH IT, THIS WAS
AN OPPONENT FOR WHICH THEY WERE
NOT PREPARED.
NOW, WE DON’T WANT TO DOWNPLAY
THE VERY REAL PROBLEMS WITH THE
IRAQI ARMY-- THE CORRUPTION, THE
LACK OF TRAINING, THE SIPHONING
OFF OF MONEY.
THERE ARE VERY REAL PROBLEMS
WITH THE IRAQI ARMY THAT WE
DON’T WANT TO DOWNPLAY.
BUT THERE IS SOME THOUGHT THAT
IF WE FOCUS THIS NEW IRAQI ARMY
ON THIS NEW PROBLEM SET THAT
THEY’RE FACING, THAT WE COULD
HAVE SOME DIFFERENT RESULTS IN
THE NOT-TOO-DISTANT FUTURE.
NOW, WE DON’T WANT TO GET AHEAD
OF OURSELVES.
THEY’RE NOT GOING TO BEAT THE
ISLAMIC STATE NEXT MONTH.
THIS IS STILL A 12-30-MONTH
ENDEAVOR, BUT THE SIGNS RIGHT
NOW ARE GOOD.
>> Brangham: A LOT OF OUR
FIGHT IN IRAQ, OBVIOUSLY, IS
AGAINST ISIS.
THEY’RE NOT JUST IN IRAQ BUT
THEY’RE ALSO IN SYRIA.
DO YOU HAVE ANY SENSE, ANY SENSE
THAT THE SUCCESSES THAT YOU’VE
SEEN IN IRAQ COULD POSSIBLY
TRANSLATE TO SUCCESS IN SYRIA?
>> UNFORTUNATELY, NO.
IN IRAQ, WE HAVE THE BASIS OF A
POLITICAL SOLUTION.
NOW, THERE’S A HUGE UPHILL CLIMB
IN IRAQ TO GET RECONCILIATION
WITH THE KURDS, WITH THE IRAQI
SUNNIS IN THE NORTH, AND WE
CAN’T DOWNPLAY HOW DIFFICULT
THAT IS.
BUT THERE’S A VERY REAL
POSSIBILITY THAT THAT COULD
HAPPEN IF EVERYONE PLAYS THEIR
CARDS RIGHT.
IN SYRIA, THERE’S NO WAY THAT I
CAN TELL YOU A STORY, HOWEVER
IMPLAUSIBLE, ABOUT HOW THE
POLITICS IN SYRIA MIGHT COME
BACK TOGETHER IN A WAY THAT
PRODUCES AN OUTCOME THAT WOULD
BE OKAY WITH US.
I MEAN, LET’S BE CANDID.
THE MOST LIKELY OUTCOME WORTHY
OF ASSAD REGIME TO FALL IN SYRIA
IS THE TAKEOVER OF SYRIA BY THE
ISLAMIC STATE AND/OR THE NUSRA
FRONT, THE OFFICIAL AL QAEDA
AFFILIATE IN SYRIA, WHICH
SOMETIMES GETS LOST IN THE TALK
ABOUT THE ISLAMIC STATE, BUT IS
NONETHELESS A VERY REAL,
OFFICIAL AL QAEDA AFFILIATE IN
THE COUNTRY.
SO THE POLITICS IN SYRIA ARE
JUST MUCH, MUCH MORE DIFFICULT.
>> Brangham: DOUGLAS OLLIVANT,
THANK YOU SO MUCH FOR JOINING
US.
>> THANK YOU, WILLIAM.
>> Brangham: AND NOW IN
TONIGHT’S SIGNATURE STORY, THE
NATIONWIDE CONTROVERSY OVER
TEACHERS AND TENURE.
SUPPORTERS SAY TENURE PROVIDES
IMPORTANT JOB PROTECTIONS, BUT
OPPONENTS SAY TENURE MAKES IT
HARD TO FIRE BAD TEACHERS AND
DIFFICULT TO KEEP GOOD TEACHERS
WITH LESS TIME ON THE JOB.
LAST SPRING, THE NEWSHOUR
TRAVELED TO CALIFORNIA TO TALK
TO STUDENTS, PARENTS AND
ADVOCATES WHO WENT TO COURT TO
CHANGE THEIR STATE’S TENURE
LAWS.
TONIGHT, WE LOOK AT THE OUTCOME
OF THAT LEGAL FIGHT AND HOW
CHALLENGES TO SIMILAR TENURE
LAWS ARE SPREADING TO ANOTHER
STATE.
MEGAN THOMPSON REPORTS.
>> Reporter: SISTERS BEATRIZ AND
ELIZABETH VERGARA ATTEND PUBLIC
HIGH SCHOOL IN A LOW-INCOME,
MOSTLY HISPANIC SECTION OF
NORTHERN LOS ANGELES.
THE GIRLS ARE AIMING FOR COLLEGE
AND WOULD BE THE FIRST IN THE
FAMILY WITH HIGHER DEGREES.
BUT THE VERGARA SISTERS SAY THAT
IN MIDDLE SCHOOL, THEY FACED
OBSTACLES IN PURSUING THEIR
EDUCATION-- CHAOTIC CLASSROOMS
AND LITTLE TO NO INSTRUCTION.
ELIZABETH, NOW A SENIOR, AND
BEATRIZ, A JUNIOR, SAY BACK IN
SEVENTH GRADE, THEY BOTH HAD A
PARTICULARLY BAD HISTORY
TEACHER.
>> HE WOULD JUST BE AT HIS DESK,
LIKE, JUST USING HIS COMPUTER OR
SLEEPING.
>> HE WOULD LET STUDENTS SMOKE
MARIJUANA.
>> Reporter: THEY WERE SMOKING
MARIJUANA IN CLASS?
>> YEAH.
I KNOW, IT’S HARD TO BELIEVE.
>> Reporter: BEATRIZ ALSO SAYS A
SCIENCE TEACHER WAS OFFENSIVE.
>> SHE WOULD CALL THIS GIRL
"WHORE" AND "SLUT, GO OVER THERE
THERE."
>> Reporter: WHAT WENT THROUGH
YOUR MIND WHEN YOU HEARD THAT?
>> I WAS SCARED TO ASK QUESTIONS
BECAUSE I DIDN’T WANT HER TO,
LIKE... I DIDN’T WANT HER TO
OFFEND ME.
>> Reporter: BEATRIZ AND
ELIZABETH’S MOTHER ALICIA
MARTINEZ, WHO IMMIGRATED FROM
MEXICO, SAYS SHE COMPLAINED TO A
SCHOOL ADMINISTRATOR ABOUT THE
TWO TEACHERS, AND TWO OTHERS.
BUT, SHE SAYS, NOTHING HAPPENED.
>> (translated): HE DIDN’T DO
ANYTHING TO ADDRESS THE
SITUATION.
THEY DIDN’T TAKE ME SERIOUSLY.
>> YOU DO SOLEMNLY STATE THAT
THE TESTIMONY YOU MAY GIVE...
>> Reporter: SO, IN 2012,
MARTINEZ VOLUNTEERED HER
DAUGHTERS TO JOIN A LAWSUIT
AGAINST THE STATE AND THE
TEACHERS UNIONS THAT WENT TO
TRIAL IN JANUARY.
THE NINE STUDENT PLAINTIFFS IN
THE CASE KNOWN AS "VERGARA V.
CALIFORNIA" CHALLENGED TWO MAIN
AREAS OF STATE LAW: PERMANENT
EMPLOYMENT AND DISMISSAL
STATUTES THE PLAINTIFFS SAY MAKE
IT DIFFICULT TO GET RID OF BAD
TEACHERS; AND THE SENIORITY-
BASED LAYOFF SYSTEM, WHICH THEY
SAY MAKES IT HARD TO KEEP GOOD,
LESS-SENIOR TEACHERS DURING
DIFFICULT TIMES.
THE PLAINTIFFS SAY THE LAWS DENY
STUDENTS THEIR RIGHT TO A
QUALITY EDUCATION, GUARANTEED BY
THE CALIFORNIA CONSTITUTION, AND
AFFECT POOR AND MINORITY
STUDENTS MORE.
>> OUR EDUCATION SYSTEM DELIVERS
A CONSTITUTIONAL RIGHT, SO
THERE’S A CERTAIN RESPONSIBILITY
OF OUR SOCIETY TO DELIVER.
>> I BELIEVE THAT EVERY CHILD,
EVERYWHERE...
>> Reporter: DAVID WELCH IS A
WEALTHY SILICON VALLEY
ENTREPRENEUR WHO FOUNDED AND
LARGELY FINANCES "STUDENTS
MATTER," AN EDUCATION-REFORM
GROUP THAT SPEARHEADED THE
LAWSUIT.
AS OF 2012, WELCH HAD DONATED OR
LOANED NEARLY $2 MILLION TO THE
GROUP, WHICH IS FOOTING THE BILL
FOR A HIGH-POWERED LEGAL TEAM
THAT INCLUDES TED OLSON, FORMER
SOLICITOR GENERAL OF THE UNITED
STATES.
WELCH HAS A Ph.D. IN ELECTRICAL
ENGINEERING AND WENT TO PUBLIC
SCHOOLS FOR MOST OF HIS
EDUCATION.
>> IT’S BECAUSE OF THESE
TEACHERS THAT I’VE BEEN ABLE TO
HAVE A SUCCESSFUL CAREER AS AN
ENGINEER AND AS AN ENTREPRENEUR.
>> Reporter: WELCH ALSO HAS
THREE YOUNG KIDS AND HAS
SUPPORTED OTHER EDUCATION AND
ENVIRONMENTAL CAUSES OVER THE
YEARS.
WHAT MOTIVATED YOU?
>> I’M A FATHER, I’M AN
EMPLOYER.
AND WHEN I LOOK AT THE SYSTEM, I
REALIZE THE SYSTEM ACTUALLY
INHIBITS ONE OF THE MOST
IMPORTANT THINGS THAT ARE FOR AN
EDUCATION FOR A CHILD.
AND THAT’S ACCESS, THE UNIFORM
ACCESS FOR EVERY CHILD TO HAVE A
PASSIONATE AND EFFECTIVE
TEACHER.
>> Reporter: SOME OF YOUR
CRITICS HAVE SAID, "YOU KNOW
WHAT?
THIS ISN’T A GRASSROOTS
MOVEMENT.
THE KIDS WERE RECRUITED, AND
MAYBE THEY’RE JUST BEING USED
FOR THE PERSONAL MISSION OF A
WEALTHY BUSINESSMAN."
WHAT DO YOU SAY TO THAT?
>> WHEN YOU SAT THERE AND YOU
WATCH THE CHILDREN GET ON THE
STAND, THERE’S NO ONE THAT PUT
THEM UP TO THAT OTHER THAN
THEMSELVES.
>> IT MADE ME NOT WANT TO TRY,
OR SHOW UP TO SCHOOL.
>> Reporter: ONE LAW WELCH IS
FIGHTING IS THE STATUTE THAT
GOVERNS TEACHER LAYOFFS.
CALIFORNIA IS ONE OF TEN STATES
THAT REQUIRES SENIORITY BE
CONSIDERED TO DETERMINE WHO
STAYS AND WHO GOES DURING BUDGET
CUTS.
JOHN DEASY IS THE FORMER
SUPERINTENDENT OF THE L.A.
UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT.
WHILE SUPERINTENDENT, HE
TESTIFIED AGAINST THE SO-CALLED
"LAST-IN, FIRST-OUT" LAW.
>> I COULDN’T THINK OF A MORE
DESTRUCTIVE STATUTE FOR
STUDENTS, STAFF, IN A SYSTEM.
WE HAVE HAD TO LAY OFF VERY
EFFECTIVE TEACHERS IN THE SAME
SCHOOL THAT WE ARE DOCUMENTING A
TEACHER FOR DISMISSAL.
THEIR CONTRIBUTIONS TO THE
SCHOOL, THEIR RELATIONSHIPS WITH
STUDENTS, HOW THEY’RE SUPPORTING
AND HELPING PARENTS, NONE OF THE
FACTORS OTHER THAN THE HIRING
DATE IS USED.
>> Reporter: THE VERGARA LAWSUIT
ALSO CHALLENGED LAWS GOVERNING
TEACHER TENURE.
CALIFORNIA’S TWO-YEAR
PROBATIONARY PERIOD FOR NEW
TEACHERS IS ONE OF THE SHORTEST
IN THE NATION.
AFTER TWO YEARS, MOST TEACHERS
GET PERMANENT EMPLOYMENT STATUS.
FORMER SUPERINTENDENT DEASY SAYS
THAT PERMANENT STATUS MEANS THE
L.A. SCHOOL DISTRICT CAN END UP
SPENDING HUNDREDS OF THOUSANDS
OF DOLLARS TO FIRE A SINGLE,
UNDERPERFORMING TEACHER-- A
PROCESS, HE SAYS, THAT CAN TAKE
A DECADE.
IT CAME OUT DURING THE TRIAL
THAT ONLY ABOUT 3% OF TEACHERS
WHO ARE... WHO WERE EVALUATED
LAST YEAR WERE BELOW STANDARD.
SO WE... SHOULD WE OVERHAUL THE
SYSTEM TO TAKE CARE OF WHAT
MIGHT JUST BE A FEW BAD APPLES?
>> WHEN YOU’VE IDENTIFIED
CHRONIC LOW PERFORMERS, YOU
CAN’T EXIT THEM QUICK ENOUGH SO
THE STUDENTS ARE NOT BEING
HARMED.
THAT’S THAT WE’RE TALKING ABOUT.
>> ARE THERE TEACHERS WHO
SHOULDN’T BE IN THE CLASSROOM?
ABSOLUTELY.
BUT TO BLOW UP THE ENTIRE SYSTEM
FOR EVALUATING AND PROTECTING
TEACHER RIGHTS BASED ON A COUPLE
OF STUDENTS’ PERSPECTIVE I THINK
REALLY MISSES THE BOAT.
>> Reporter: JOSHUA PECHTHALT IS
PRESIDENT OF THE CALIFORNIA
FEDERATION OF TEACHERS, ONE OF
THE UNIONS THAT FOUGHT THE
LAWSUIT.
HE SAYS THE UNIONS SUPPORT
EFFORTS TO STREAMLINE THE
DISMISSAL PROCESS.
>> I THINK THE DISMISSAL PROCESS
COULD BE MORE EFFECTIVE AND MORE
EFFICIENT.
>> Reporter: PECHTHALT SAYS THAT
MANY INEFFECTIVE TEACHERS ARE
WEEDED OUT DURING THE TWO-YEAR
PROBATION PERIOD.
AND, HE SAYS, GRANTING PERMANENT
STATUS TO THE REST ENCOURAGES
THEM TO STAY ON THE JOB DESPITE
OFTEN DIFFICULT CLASSROOM
CONDITIONS.
>> THE BIGGER PROBLEM WE HAVE IN
CALIFORNIA AND I THINK
NATIONALLY IS THAT WE CAN’T KEEP
TEACHERS IN THE PROFESSION.
CLASSES ARE OVERCROWDED.
THERE AREN’T ENOUGH RESOURCES.
SO, THAT REALLY IS THE BIGGER
ISSUE IN PUBLIC EDUCATION, AND
THAT’S CREATING CONDITIONS THAT
MAKE IT ATTRACTIVE FOR PEOPLE TO
MAKE THIS A LIFELONG PROFESSION.
>> IT’S A REMAINDER OF 2 AND A
DIVISOR OF 3.
>> Reporter: FOURTH GRADE
TEACHER KELLY IWAMOTO OF
INGLEWOOD, CALIFORNIA, SAYS SHE
KNOWS FIRSTHAND HOW PRECARIOUS
HER JOB CAN BE.
BECAUSE SHE DOESN’T HAVE ENOUGH
SENIORITY, SHE’S BEEN LAID OFF
THREE TIMES IN THE LAST THREE
YEARS, THEN BROUGHT BACK.
EVEN SO, SHE SUPPORTS THE
SENIORITY-BASED LAYOFF SYSTEM.
SHE SAYS IT’S OBJECTIVE AND
CLEAR.
>> IT’S FAIR.
IT’S FAIR, AND I SUPPORT IT.
>> Reporter: IWAMOTO ALSO SAYS
SHE SUPPORTS THE OTHER PART OF
THE LAW THAT’S BEING CHALLENGED:
PERMANENT STATUS FOR TEACHERS
AFTER TWO YEARS.
SHE SAYS THAT PROVISION ACTUALLY
HELPS HER ADVOCATE FOR STUDENTS
WITHOUT FEAR OF BEING FIRED.
>> BECAUSE I SPEAK OUT VERY
FREQUENTLY ABOUT RESOURCES BEING
BROUGHT TO OUR DISTRICT.
IF SOMEONE DOESN’T LIKE WHAT
I’M SAYING, THEN I CAN BE LET
GO FOR THAT, AND I DON’T THINK
THAT’S FAIR.
>> Reporter: IWAMOTO AND THE
UNIONS ALSO SAY A TEACHER’S
EFFECTIVENESS IS DIFFICULT TO
MEASURE, AND, THEY SAY, STUDENTS
DON’T NECESSARILY CONNECT WITH
EVERY TEACHER.
DURING THE TRIAL, ELIZABETH
VERGARA TESTIFIED THAT SHE
LEARNED NOTHING IN ENGLISH CLASS
AND WASN’T ASSIGNED AN ENTIRE
BOOK TO READ ALL YEAR, BUT THE
TEACHER TESTIFIED THAT VERGARA’S
READING SCORES ACTUALLY WENT UP.
>> WE READ AND WROTE EVERY DAY.
>> AND DID YOU EVER RECEIVE ANY
NEGATIVE MARKS ON YOUR
EVALUATIONS OR OBSERVATIONS?
>> I DID NOT.
>> A LOCAL JUDGE MADE A MAJOR
RULING ON TEACHER TENURE.
>> Reporter: AFTER MONTHS OF
ARGUMENTS AND DELIBERATIONS,
LAST JUNE, THE JUDGE RULED IN
FAVOR OF THE VERGARA PLAINTIFFS,
DECLARING THE TENURE LAWS
UNCONSTITUTIONAL.
THE JUDGE WROTE IN HIS DECISION:
"SUBSTANTIAL EVIDENCE PRESENTED
MAKES IT CLEAR TO THIS COURT
THAT THE CHALLENGED STATUTES
DISPROPORTIONATELY AFFECT POOR
AND/OR MINORITY STUDENTS."
HIS RULING IS CURRENTLY ON HOLD
AS IT’S BEING APPEALED BY THE
UNIONS AND CALIFORNIA GOVERNOR
JERRY BROWN.
>> PARENTS AND EDUCATORS TAKING
ON NEW YORK STATE’S TEACHER
TENURE SYSTEM.
>> Reporter: BUT IT SPURRED
LEGAL ACTION IN ANOTHER STATE.
WITHIN WEEKS, PARENTS IN NEW
YORK FILED TWO LAWSUITS-- NOW
CONSOLIDATED INTO ONE-- OPPOSING
THAT STATE’S TEACHER TENURE
LAWS.
FORMER NBC AND CNN ANCHOR
CAMPBELL BROWN IS BACKING THE
LAWSUIT THROUGH A NONPROFIT SHE
LAUNCHED EARLIER THIS YEAR, AND
IS SPEAKING OUT EXTENSIVELY IN
SUPPORT OF IT.
>> BUT WE KNOW THAT THE SINGLE
MOST IMPORTANT SCHOOL-BASED
FACTOR IN DETERMINING A CHILD’S
SUCCESS IS THE EFFECTIVENESS OF
THE TEACHER, SO WHY WOULDN’T WE
DO EVERYTHING POSSIBLE TO GET
THE MOST EFFECTIVE TEACHER
POSSIBLE IN EVERY CLASSROOM?
>> Reporter: THE NEW YORK
PLAINTIFFS ARE ALSO AIDED BY A
FAMOUS ATTORNEY, DAVID BOIES,
WHO’S LEADING BROWN’S NONPROFIT.
BOIES WAS AL GORE’S ATTORNEY
AFTER THE 2000 ELECTION, AND HE
SUCCESSFULLY ARGUED AGAINST
CALIFORNIA’S GAY MARRIAGE BAN IN
FRONT OF THE SUPREME COURT.
BUT JUST LIKE IN CALIFORNIA, THE
UNIONS ARE FIGHTING THE LAWSUIT.
NEW YORK STATE UNITED TEACHERS
FILED A MOTION TO DISMISS THE
SUIT, ITS PRESIDENT SAYING:
"TENURE IS AN IMPORTANT
SAFEGUARD THAT ENSURES CHILDREN
RECEIVE A QUALITY EDUCATION.
IT ENABLES TEACHERS TO SPEAK OUT
IN THE BEST INTEREST OF THEIR
STUDENTS, AND IT PROTECTS
ACADEMIC FREEDOM."
ARGUMENTS IN THE NEW YORK
LAWSUIT ARE EXPECTED IN JANUARY.
>> Brangham: WHAT ARE THE LAWS
SURROUNDING TEACHER TENURE IN
YOUR STATE?
ODDS ARE, THEY COULD BE
CHANGING.
FOR MORE, VISIT
newshour.pbs.org.
>> Brangham: BEFORE WE LEAVE
YOU TONIGHT, U.S. GUN SALES SAW
A MAJOR SPIKE ON BLACK FRIDAY,
RESULTING IN A RECORD NUMBER OF
BACKGROUND CHECKS.
THIS, ACCORDING TO THE F.B.I.,
WHICH SAYS IT RECEIVED MORE THAN
144,000 BACKGROUND CHECK
REQUESTS IN JUST ONE DAY.
THAT’S MORE THAN THREE TIMES THE
DAILY AVERAGE.
RETURNING TO EGYPT, THOUSANDS OF
DEMONSTRATORS TOOK TO THE
STREETS IN CENTRAL CAIRO,
PROTESTING THE DISMISSAL OF
CHARGES THAT FORMER PRESIDENT
HOSNI MUBARAK WAS RESPONSIBLE
FOR KILLING HUNDREDS OF
DEMONSTRATORS DURING THE ARAB
SPRING UPRISING IN 2011.
ACCORDING TO THE ASSOCIATED
PRESS, SECURITY FORCES USED
WATER CANNONS AND TEAR GAS TO
DISPERSE THE CROWDS.
THAT’S ALL FOR THIS EDITION OF
PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
I’M WILLIAM BRANGHAM.
GOOD NIGHT.